# IDV

Introducing the **Interaction**, **Data** and **View**
design pattern.

> IDV = I + D + V

Every project I've been employed to work on so far I've taken
on the responsibility for reorganising brownfield and
designing the architecture for greenfield applications. The
IDV pattern comes from my frustration of change. Not that I
don't like change – I love what change brings. No, it's the
fact *change is hard*.

> Change should be cheap

I really believe this. Change happens and is required in
business. Applications represent businesses. Applications need
to be changed for business reasons. If change is inevitable,
shouldn't we prepare for it? What would being prepared for
change look like? Or, to put it another way. What does not
being prepared for change look like?

 - Things are tightly coupled
 - Locked to vendors (concrete implementations everywhere)
 - Leaky encapsulation
 - Confusing or undocumented interfaces

Face it, it looks a mess and we've all been there.

Like I said, IDV came from a frustration of change caused by
the problems listed above. So I have potential solutions. In
fact I'd call them working solutions because I've developed
and utilised them over time.

The main premise is the separation of concerns by introducing
clear boundaries to your business and application logic. By
using a small set of interfaces we can avoid a lot of these
problems of change.

I say small set, it's purposefully a small set. The idea is
that the interfaces you introduce *will not change*. So we
define broad and generic method interfaces so these unchanging
parts never cause a problem.

## Unchanging interfaces

What does an unchanging interface look like?

 - An unchanging interface will be method based rather than
   class based so that we can switch implementations at
   anytime.

 - Method names will be generic enough not to hint any
   implementation details.

 - The only parameter will be a hash. This allows any and all
   kinds of information to be passed in. (At least in
   dynamically typed languages.)

 - The only returned value will also be a hash. This means
   anyone can consume the data returned. Hashes and scalar
   values should be the only values returned within the main
   hash.

A flexible unchanging interface means that communication
between areas of your application can happen in a limited way.
This means change to logic inside the interfaces are fully
encapsulated and are less likely to cause problems in other
areas of the application.

We do however need to decide where to draw these interface
lines.

## Separation of Concerns

In order to decide where to implement these unchanging
interfaces we need to understand the separation of concerns.
We need to work out where to separate. The answer is in the
name. We need to separate out the parts that aren't concerned
with how the other parts do things.

How do most web frameworks split out application logic? MVC!
MVC tells us that Model, View and Controller logic are
separate concerns.

MVC fails with the unchanging interface criteria.
Models in web application world often have many methods and
are used in views and controllers. Controllers can have many
actions and views have many methods and often mix logic with
templates or logic in controllers. This makes for disaster
because the interface of a class is the public methods it
exposes. The more methods exposed the more weakness your
application will have to the changes made in these methods.

> MVC is a bastardised separation of concerns

So what areas is MVC trying to tackle? Uncle Bob [tells us][1]
that the business logic should be wrapped in interface logic.
So we have business logic, M. Snug in between the interface
and business logic is a view layer for presenting the business
data and logic, that's V. C is the controller layer which
is basically the communication of the areas of the application
to the interface by which the application is delivered.

I'd like to define these better. And not in some weird circle
diagram. I'd still split it into three layers like MVC:

 - The protocol for delivering the application
 - The data layer for applying business logic to data
 - The view layer for presentation

Or in other words IDV: **Interaction**, **Data** and **View**.

This isn't clearly defined enough yet though. Each one of
these concerns have several concerns themselves. We'll discuss
each section and their concerns briefly.

### Interaction

Interaction is the application itself. It is the delivery
mechanism for the applications content. It is also the
layer that communicates with the domain in order to produce
the applications content. That's two concerns right there.

 1. Interaction with user over protocol communication
 2. Interaction with the business (domain) layer

Or in two simple terms **Application** and **Controller**.

> I = A + C

Typicalling routing and protocol handling will be done in the
application layer. This layer will then communicate with one
or more controllers. The controllers will then interact with
the data and view layers and produce a response which is then
returned back to the application for delivery to the user.

I have written more about the [interaction layer][2] if you
wish to find out more.

### Data

Data is the core business logic. It deals with asking business
questions of data. It also handles the inserting, updating and
deletion of business data. Along with this business logic it
also handles the communication with the data sources of the
application. Three concerns.

 1. Interaction with data sources
 2. Modelling of data for answering business questions
 3. Performing business actions on data

Or more simply **Mapper**, **Model** and **Action**.

> D = Ma + Mo + A

Models and actions will be called by a controller. The
controller will pass in mappers and other request information
to the models and actions and pass their responses into the
view layer or immediately return control to the application
layer.

I have written more about the [data layer][3] if you wish to
find out more.

### View

View is the translation of business data into a presentation
for the user. It handles the structure of data for
presentation. It also handles the modelling of data for
presentation. Along with these responsibilities it also needs
to merge the modelled data into the structure. Three concerns
just like data.

 1. Structuring data for presentation
 2. Modelling data for presentation
 3. Merging the structure and modelled data for presentation

Or more simply **Template**, **Model** and
**Template Engine**.

> V = T + M + TE

The controller will first pass data from the view layer and
request into the view model. It will then use the template
engine to merge this view model with a template. This data
will then be formed into a response and passed back to the
application layer.

I have written more about the [view layer][4] if you wish to
find out more.

## Summary

Using unchanging interfaces between each one of the sub
concerns defined above will allow you to substitute each
concern as per the [Liskov substitution principle][5]. Being
able to switch out each component separately means they can
be tested independently, parts can be replaced without
affecting other sections of the application and you only have
to introduce 8 types of interfaces to your entire application.

> IDV = (A + C) (Ma + Mo + A) (T + M + TE)

This article was more theory than code examples so I apologise
for that. You'll find in the links throughout code examples of
each layer of IDV. If I tried to fit them all into this one
article there would have been trouble.

Let me know what you think [@LukeMorton][6].

[1]: http://blog.8thlight.com/uncle-bob/2012/08/13/the-clean-architecture.html
[2]: /thoughts/2013-09-26-interaction
[3]: /thoughts/2013-09-25-data
[4]: /thoughts/2013-09-24-views
[5]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liskov_substitution_principle
[6]: https://twitter.com/LukeMorton
