# Data

My thoughts on the data triad. That is **mappers**, **models**
and **actions**.

The data triad is all about setting and getting data to and 
from data sources. The first part of the triad, mappers, are
all about communicating with data sources.

~~~ ruby
class UsersHashMapper
  def initialize(data = {})
    @data = data
  end

  def find_by_ids(ids)
    data.select {|id| ids.include?(id)}
  end

  def find_one_by_id(id)
    data[id]
  end

  def find_one_by_email(email)
    data.select {|id, row| row[:email] == email}.first
  end

  def insert(key, row)
    data[key] = row
  end

  private

  attr_reader :data
end
~~~

So as you can see mappers do a fair bit of the leg work. They
encapsulate communication with a data source by providing a
number of methods.

The example above takes a hash of data on construction and
it's method selects or inserts hashes from that hash.

Data models use mapper methods to select data. They then model
this data to be consumed. In a web application a model would
be called by a controller and used to determine the outcome of
a request. The controller can also pass the modelled data to
view models for further view related transformation.

You might have a data model to get user data for a profile.

~~~ ruby
class UserProfileDataModel
  def to_hash(data)
    user = data[:mappers][:users].find_one_by_id(data[:user_id])

    if user.has_key?(:friends)
      user[:friends] = data[:mappers][:users].find_by_ids(user[:friends])
    end

    {:user => user}
  end
end
~~~

We load a user hash by calling `#find_one_by_id` on an
injected mapper. We then have the replacement of
`user[:friends]` with a selection of other user data using the
injected mapper's `#find_by_ids`. The completed user hash is
then returned as part of another hash.

As you can see data models are used to build up data and model
it for consumption. Usually for a specific use case.

So you might have guessed what data actions do. They act upon
data sources via data mappers. They insert, update and delete.

~~~ ruby
require 'active_model'

class UserRegistrationValidator < Struct.new(:name, :email, :age)
  include ActiveModel::Validations

  def initialize(user)
    super(*user.values_at(*members))
  end

  validates :name, :presence => true
  validates :email, :presence => true #, :email => true
  validates :age, :presence => true, :numericality => true
end

class ValidationError < RuntimeError
  attr_reader :validator

  def initialize(validator)
    @validator = validator
  end
end

class RegisterUserDataAction
  def exec(data)
    validator = UserRegistrationValidator.new(data[:user])

    if validator.invalid?
      raise ValidationError.new(validator)
    end

    user = validator.to_h
    id = data[:mappers][:users].insert(user[:name].downcase.to_sym, user)
    {:user_id => id}
  end
end
~~~

So I included a couple more classes to make this a complete
example. You shouldn't really put data into a source without
validating it first you know!

The main point of discussion however is
`RegisterUserDataAction`. It uses a validator to ensure the
data is good to insert. If it isn't it'll encapsulate the
validator in an error and raise it. Alternatively you could
return a hash of error data. If the data was fine this will
then get passed to `#insert`, another mapper method. You might
also send welcome emails at this point which would happen on a
service injected into the `#exec` method just like the
mappers.

## Brief roundup

So that's that. A quick summary:

 - mappers act on data sources
 - models use mappers to get and model data
 - actions use mappers to set data, usually with validation

Just like the separation of concerns with [`T + M + TE`][1]
we get all the goodness of modular design.

Mappers define a source agnostic interface for communicating
with data sources. They should be written agnostically so you
can replace them with alternate mappers for other data
sources. They should always be injected into models and
actions so you can replace them. Mappers could potentially
interface with [ActiveRecord][3], [ROM][4] or more
directly with data layers such as [Sequel][5] or [Mongo][6].

Models aren't your ActiveRecord model. They take in mappers
and data for querying and return a hash model. This is why the
method is called `#to_hash` after all. Models are directly
coupled to the mapper methods they call. This is to be
expected and of course the model only exposes one public
method so the mapper implementation is hidden from the
application controller or where ever your model is used.

Actions also aren't your ActiveRecord model. They take in
mappers and data to insert, update or delete records in a data
source. They too, like models, are directly coupled with the
mapper methods but again only have one public interface
themselves `#exec`. Ideally actions will validate the data
before acting on it. They needn't be tied to the validator
class like the example above, of course this could have also
been injected.

## Final note

I've been calling this the data triad. I also refer to these
components with the following equation.

> D = Ma + Mo + A

Also I've previously written about the [view triad][1]. Let me
know what you think of the D or the V that I've written about
[@LukeMorton][2].

[1]: /thoughts/2013-09-25-views
[2]: https://twitter.com/LukeMorton
[3]: http://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_record_basics.html
[4]: http://rom-rb.org/
[5]: https://twitter.com/LukeMorton
[6]: https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-ruby-driver

